.. _references:

Links, Support and Extra Documentation
======================================


EIAM: Convention and directives used to class species in the “red list”
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

1. The Bonn convention or the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory
   Species of Wild Animals (CMS):

As an environmental treaty under the aegis of the United Nations Environment
Programme, CMS provides a global platform for the conservation and sustainable
use of migratory animals and their habitats. CMS brings together the States
through which migratory animals pass, the Range States, and lays the legal
foundation for internationally coordinated conservation measures throughout a
migratory range.

Migratory species threatened with extinction are listed on Appendix I of the
Convention. CMS Parties strive towards strictly protecting these animals,
conserving or restoring the places where they live, mitigating obstacles to
migration and controlling other factors that might endanger them. Besides
establishing obligations for each State joining the Convention, CMS promotes
concerted action among the Range States of many of these species.

More details on http://www.cms.int/en

2. The Birds Directive:

Europe is home to more than 500 wild bird species. But at least 32 % of the EU's
bird species are currently not in a good conservation status. The Birds
Directive aims to protect all of the 500 wild bird species naturally occurring
in the European Union.

Often migratory, wild bird species can only be protected by cooperating across
borders. Urban sprawl and transport networks have fragmented and reduced their
habitats, intensive agriculture, forestry, fisheries and the use of pesticides
have diminished their food supplies, and hunting needed to be regulated in
order not to damage populations. Concerned with their decline, Member States
unanimously adopted the Directive 79/409/EEC in April 1979. It is the oldest
piece of EU legislation on the environment and one of its cornerstones. Amended
in 2009, it became the Directive 2009/147/EC. 

Habitat loss and degradation are the most serious threats to the conservation of
wild birds. The Directive therefore places great emphasis on the protection of
habitats for endangered and migratory species. It establishes a network of
Special Protection Areas (SPAs) including all the most suitable territories for
these species. Since 1994, all SPAs are included in the Natura 2000 ecological
network, set up under the Habitats Directive 92/43/EEC. 

The 500 wild bird species naturally occurring in the European Union are
protected in various ways: Annex 1: 194 species and sub-species are
particularly threatened. Member States must designate Special Protection Areas
(SPAs) for their survival and all migratory bird species.

More details on
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/legislation/birdsdirective/index_en.htm

3. The Habitats Directive:

The Habitats Directive ensures the conservation of a wide range of rare,
threatened or endemic animal and plant species. Some 200 rare and
characteristic habitat types are also targeted for conservation in their own
right.

Adopted in 1992, the Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the
conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora aims to promote
the maintenance of biodiversity, taking account of economic, social, cultural
and regional requirements. It forms the cornerstone of Europe's nature
conservation policy with the Birds Directive and establishes the EU wide Natura
2000 ecological network of protected areas, safeguarded against potentially
damaging developments.

All in all, over 1.000 animal and plant species, as well as 200 habitat types,
listed in the directive's annexes are protected in various ways:

Annex IV species (over 400, including many annex II species): a strict
protection regime must be applied across their entire natural range within the
EU, both within and outside Natura 2000 sites.

More details on
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/legislation/habitatsdirective/index_en.htm

