.. _user_env:

Environmental Impact Assessment module (EIAM)
---------------------------------------------

Introduction
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The purpose of the Environmental Impact Assessment Module (EIAM) is to assess
the environmental impacts generated by the various technological choices to
optimize an array of wave or tidal devices. This is done by a set of specific
functions (e.g. collision risk, noise…) that are able to qualify and quantify
the potential pressures generated by the array of wave or tidal devices on the
marine environment. The EIAM provides a rating (overall score and detailed by
modules) for various technological choices selected in the tools.

The approach used here is based on the concept of environmental effects
generated by 'stressors' and the related sensibility of 'receptors' to these
effects. A stressor is any physical, chemical, or biological entity that can
induce an adverse response. Stressors may adversely affect specific physical
resources of marine ecosystems that interact directly with the biological
components of these ecosystems: including plants and animals. 

Within the above framework, it is therefore a matter to systematically identify
and evaluate the relationships between all stressors and their impact on
receptors. In order to achieve this, a set of environmental functions are
considered to determine environmental scores (through specific mathematical
functions). 13 functions have been defined, 10 related to negative impacts and 3
related to positive impacts (Reef effect, Reserve effect and resting place
effect). The list of the different issues taken into account in the EIAM is
given in the :numref:`fig-env-impacts`.


.. _fig-env-impacts:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_impacts.png

   List of environmental impacts assessed by DTOcean


Each function is specifically allocated to the different DTOcean modules
(Hydrodynamics, Electrical Sub-Systems, Mooring and Foundations...), as each
module involves different stressors depending on its purpose.
:numref:`fig-env-modules` shows which functions are assessed for each of the
DTOcean modules. Behind these allocations issues / module lie specific related
mathematical functions. The description of these functions is available in the
technical user manual.


.. _fig-env-modules:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_modules.png

   Environmental issues associated with each DTOcean modules

   
Architecture
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The architecture is based on a scoring system using mathematical functions to
assess the environmental impacts. The process of these functions produces
numerical values (from function's scores) that are converted to Environment
Impact Score (EIS) ranging from +50 to -100 (scale shown in
:numref:`fig-env-scale-user`). The mathematical detail of each function is 
available in the technical manual.


.. _fig-env-scale-user:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_scale.png

   Environmental Impact Score (EIS) scale


The scoring allocation system is generic for each environmental function and is
based on three main steps, summarized in :numref:`fig-env-scoring-user` and in 
the description below:


.. _fig-env-scoring-user:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_scoring.png

   Scoring architecture for the Environmental Impact Assessment Module (EIAM)

where CL = Level of Confidence: 1 Low, 2 Medium and 3 High.

 * STEP 1: quantification of the 'pressure' generated by the stressors

The quantification of the pressure is obtained from the run of the selected
environmental functions which produced the Pressure Score (PS). The PS ranges
from 0 to 5 for the all functions where 5 corresponds to the highest effect,
negative or positive, depending on the function. The PS is then adjusted to a
new numerical value called the Pressure Score adjusted (PSa) through a
'weighting protocol' by multiplying the PS with a coefficient ranging from 0 to
1. This happens if local environmental factors exist, which are independent
from the receptors, and are not included in the function's formula. If no
weighting is generated, a default value of 1 is used, with the precautionary
principle prevalent throughout the EIAM process. At this stage the level of
confidence is at its lowest.

 * STEP 2: quantification of the receptor sensitivity

The second step is triggered if the user is able to indicate the existence of
receptors onsite. Step 2 uses the score initially generated in step 1 and then
adjusts it depending on the receptor’s sensitivity by multiplying the PSa with
the Receptor Sensitivity coefficient (RS), which ranges from 0 to 5, unless the
user has no receptor data, in which case the RS is assumed to be 5. This
process leads to the Receptor Sensitivity Score (RSS). The different receptors
are gathered within main classes reflecting their sensitivity to pressure. The
user will have to choose between these different main classes of receptors that
will be characterized by having RS values ranging from 0 to 5 for low to high
sensitivity, respectively. When several receptors are identified onsite, the
most sensitive receptors will be considered for the EIS calculations. To
ultimately obtain the EIS a linear mapping is applied and specific calibration
tables are used to convert RSS to EIS. In the case where the user declares a
receptor that is regulatory protected (list provided by the database), by
default this will automatically lead to an EIS of -100. If the user is able to
provide details about the existence of receptors, the level of confidence
increases to medium.

 * STEP 3: qualification of the seasonal distribution of receptors

The last step is triggered if the user has monthly data for the existence of
receptors onsite. The step then modulates the final EIS to take into account
less sensitive receptors when the highest sensitive receptors are declared
absent. Step 3 is similar to step 2 for each specific receptor declared onsite
and the EIS is equal to 0 for any receptors absent in a particular month. For
each month, the EIS is given by most sensitive species present. If monthly data
are lacking the tool will consider the receptor is present throughout the year. 

If the user has such monthly data, the level of confidence is at its highest.
Functional Specifications


Inputs
''''''

The EIAM requires some inputs to be able to provide an EIS. These inputs are
provided by the user and the other DTOcean modules and are listed in the table
below, grouped by module.  


.. _fig-env-inputs_hydro:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_inputs_hydro.png

   EIAM inputs related to hydrodynamics (Name, unit, source and description)

   
.. _fig-env-inputs_elec:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_inputs_elec.png

   EIAM inputs related to electrical architecture (Name, unit, source and description)

   
.. _fig-env-inputs_moor:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_inputs_moor.png

   EIAM inputs related to moorings and foundations (Name, unit, source and description)
   
   
.. _fig-env-inputs_install:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_inputs_install.png

   EIAM inputs related to installation (Name, unit, source and description)
   
   
.. _fig-env-inputs_om:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_inputs_om.png

   EIAM inputs related to operations and maintenance (Name, unit, source and description)

   
Regarding noise measurement unit, the EIAM (for the pressure functions and the
receptor sensitivity) uses dB re1µPa as main unit. The user has to make sure
about using this unit. Indeed in some MRE projects impact assessments, the
common noise measurement unit produced by the background of devices is ‘dB re
1µPa²’. The :numref:`fig-env-noise` shows that these two units are different.


.. _fig-env-noise:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_noise.png

   Example of the noise radiated by an operating tidal current turbine. (In blue the Third Octave Band SPL [dB re 1µPa] (could have been Wide Band SPL = one value) and in black, the Power Spectrum Density Level [dB re 1µPa²/Hz])

   
To achieve the STEP 1, the Pressure score is adjusted through a weighting
protocol in order to better characterise the environmental impact. In that
context, weighting protocol are associated to some modules and related
functions. 11 weighting parameters categories have been defined and are
described in :numref:`fig-env-weighting`.


.. _fig-env-weighting:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_weighting.png

   Weighting parameters categories descriptions with functions and modules assigned


Details about values assigned to each weighting parameters categories are given
in the following tables:
 

.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight1.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated for soil
   
   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight2.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to technologies

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight3.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to surroundings

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight4.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to Moorings

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight5.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to Dangerous parts of devices

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight6.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to Device underwater noise (device, electrical components, moorings)

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight7.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to Vessel underwater noise

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight8.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to Biocids and pollutants

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight9.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to Fishery restriction

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight10.png

   Weighting parameters and scores associated to Extern electrical components

   
.. figure:: /images/user/env_weight11.png

   Cable position category: Weighting parameters and scores associated


To qualify the receptor sensitivity (STEP 2), the user could be asked to better
define the receptor present in the area. The main receptor categories are given
in :numref:`fig-env-receptors`. A list of 13 receptor categories has been
defined for the all EIAM.


.. _fig-env-receptors:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_receptors.png

   Receptor categories


For each function in each module, a specific score is assigned to each relevant
receptor categories depending on the sensitivity of each category to the
pressure.

The :numref:`fig-env-sensivity` shows the example of the scores assigned to the
receptor categories for the collision risk function in the hydrodynamics module.


.. _fig-env-sensivity:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_sensivity.png

   Receptor sensitivity scores example for the collision risk function in the hydrodynamics module

   
As most marine mammals, birds and reptiles are protected by European regulations
(Bonn convention, Berne convention, Birds directive, Ascobans, Accobam…), a
“red list” has been established in the EIAM for those with the highest level of
protection. The user has the possibility to indicate the occurrence of one (or
more) of these protected species on top of the main receptor categories.

The list is presented in :numref:`fig-env-protected`. The 26 species are baleen
whales species classified by the annex I of the Bonn Convention. The bird
species in the list are also classified by the annex I of the birds directive
and the reptiles species by the annex IV of the Habitats directive. 

**Reminder**: If the user declares the presence of a receptor that is highly
protected in the European regulations so included within the “red list” (list
provided internally in the tool), by default this choice will automatically
lead to an EIS of -100.


.. _fig-env-protected:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_protected.png

   “Red list” constituted by highly protected species in the European regulations


Finally in order to proceed STEP 3, inputs requested are related to the seasonal
distribution of receptors. The last step of the EIAM process takes into account
the seasonal distribution of receptors onsite to modulate the receptor
sensitivity. For each environmental function the EIAM proposed to the user the
possibility to define the monthly distribution of the ‘selected’ receptors. The
:numref:`fig-env-season` presents an example of the required inputs for the 6
receptors relevant to the collision risk function of the electrical sub-systems
module.
 

.. _fig-env-season:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_season.png

   Example of receptor seasonal distribution inputs for the collision risk function of the electrical sub-systems module


Execution
'''''''''

This part of the manual explains how the EIAM with the three steps presented
below is executed within the GUI.  

 * **STEP 1** : Quantification of the 'pressure' generated by the stressors

   * General inputs

When inputs are provided by the other modules of the tool, there is no special
step to proceed in the GUI for the execution of EIAM. 


.. _fig-env-input-moduledata:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_input_moduledata.png

   Example of the GUI (EIAM pipeline) as lease boundary for input directly provided by the hydrodynamics module
   
   
For inputs provided by the user, these inputs have to be entered manually
through a widget within the GUI as shown in :numref:`fig-env-input-nodata`.


.. _fig-env-input-nodata:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_input_nodata.png

   Example of input to be provided by the user directly by the GUI


   * Weighting protocol

For each weighting parameter, related to the relevant functions and modules, a
dropdown menu allows the user to select the value in preselected lists. An
example is presented below.


.. _fig-env-input-weighting:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_input_weighting.png

   Example of weighting parameters selection for the underwater noise function in the hydrodynamics module.


* **STEP 2**: Quantification of the receptor sensitivity and STEP 3:
  Qualification of the seasonal distribution of receptors

The steps 2 (Receptor qualification) and 3 (seasonal distribution) are grouped
together in the GUI. For each category of receptor, the user has the following
choices:

   1. complete the observation box by true, false or a blank box if there is
      no information. 

   2. If the selected category of species is supposed to be observed all year
      long, but the user does not have this precise information, the user can
      simply complete the first bow called “year” That will lead to a medium
      confidence level for the EIS score.

   3. If the selected category of species is exactly known to be observed all
      year long, the user has to complete all boxes. That will lead to a high
      confidence level for the EIS score.


.. _fig-env-input-receptors:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_input_receptors.png

   Example of the EIAM GUI for the medium diving birds receptor category


**Protected species / “red list”**:

In the case where the user want to declare a species included in the
“**red list**”, he has to tick the box in the corresponding line of the
receptors list presented in the pipeline as shown in the figure below.

   
.. _fig-env-input-protected:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_input_protected.png

   Example of the EIAM GUI for a species of the “red list”: the Risso’s dolphin

   
Outputs
'''''''

The main outputs from the EIAM will consist of a set of scores. In order for the
user to have both a global environmental assessment and detailed information
when using the DTOcean EIAM, two levels (L1 and L2) of results are
available within the software. At each level, adverse and positive impacts are
always given separately. The different display levels are defined as follow:

* Level 1: The first level of assessment provides a global (agglomerated) EIS
  given for each module. The result for each module is generated by the
  summation of EIS obtained by each function selected for that specific module
  and normalised on the scal e ranging from +50 to -100. This level also
  contains the range of impacts associated with the EIS for each module. A
  graphical example of the level 1 results is given in
  :numref:`fig-module-impact-user`.

.. _fig-module-impact-user:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_output_global.png

   Illustration of the module environmental impact score display

* Level 2: The second level provides full details at the function level. This
  level also contains the level of confidence associated to the EIS for each
  function. A graphical illustration of this level is shown in
  :numref:`fig-function-impact-user`.

.. _fig-function-impact-user:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_output_function.png

   Illustration of the function environmental impact score display


A set of recommendations is also implemented in the EIAM module. Its purpose is
to help the user to better understand what lies behind the scores in term of
qualitative issues related to the pressure scores. The recommendations are
specific and a set of recommendation is available for each function of the
modules. They are available through the graphical User Interface (GUI) when EIS
are displayed. Examples of recommendations are given in
:numref:`fig-env-output-recommendations` below.


.. _fig-env-output-recommendations:

.. figure:: /images/user/env_output_recommendations.png

   Illustration of recommendations given in the GUI

